---
title: React Notes
permalink: react-notes
date: 2015-06-07
---

# React Notes

Some ReactJS notes:

1. Never write to `this.props`, treat it as immutable
2. `type Component :: props -> state -> HTML`
3. React components can only render a **single** root node.
4. JSX:
	- namespaced components
	- expression wrap with `{}`
	- comments must be within `{}`
	- expression can eval to JSX components
	- supports spread attributes, `{...props}`, cool!
	- custom attributes should start with `data-`
	- All DOM properties and attributes (including event handlers) should be
	camelCased to be consistent with standard JavaScript style.
	- The `style` attribute accepts a JavaScript object with camelCased properties
	rather than a CSS string.
5. Callbacks are auto-bound to the component instance, uses event delegation
meaning handlers are not bind to the dom node.
6. **Try to keep as many of your components as possible stateless.** By doing
this you'll isolate the state to its most logical place and minimize redundancy,
making it easier to reason about your application.
7. _A common pattern is to create several stateless components that just render
data, and have a stateful component above them in the hierarchy that passes its
state to its children via props._ The stateful component encapsulates all of the
interaction logic, while the stateless components take care of rendering data in
a declarative way.
8. Do **NOT** store computed data in `state`
9. Parent component can read its children at `this.props.children`, use
`React.Children.utilities` yo manipulate them
10. Stateful children should be handled with careful.
11. Component can have `key`s to maintain its identity. Use keyd fragments to
maintain order of a set of groups of children.`ReactFragment React.addons.createFragment(object children)`
12. Break down UI elements into reusable components.
13. `React.PropTypes` can be used to validate props, for performance reasons these
validations only happend in development mode.
14. Use `getDefaultProps` to define default values for `prop`s
15. Controlled component vs. uncontrolled component
16. Since the event system is implemented by React, sometimes we want to
mainipulate DOM node directly, use `React.findDOMNode(component)` and `ref`
17. Never retain `this.refs` references
18. If you have not programmed several apps with React, your first inclination is
usually going to be to try to use refs to "make things happen" in your app. If this
is the case, take a moment and think more critically about where state should be
owned in the component hierarchy. Often, it becomes clear that the proper place to
"**own**" that state is at a higher level in the hierarchy. Placing the state
there often eliminates any desire to use refs to "make things happen" – instead,
the data flow will usually accomplish your goal.
