---
title: WebAssembly Basics
permalink: webassembly-basics
date: 2016-07-14
published: false
---

# WebAssembly

WebAssembly(wasm for short) is a *general-purpose* virtual intruction set
architecture designed to be a compilation target for a wide variety of programming
languages.

The unit of WebAssembly code is the module. A module consists of several sections.
The sections are much like the same ones in other executable file formats(e.g. PE).
A module can be encoded either in binary or text format, and can be translated
from one to the other. Sections can contain date, functions, imports/exports and
other metadata.

WebAssembly code must be validated before it can be instantiated and executed.

## Basics

### Linear Memory

Linear memory is like heap, it's a contiguous, byte-addressable r/w range of
memory. It can be increased dynamically at runtime. Linear memory is sandboxed.

### Bytes

8-bit, addressing unit for linear memory.

### Pages

64KB, unit for linear memory size.

### Basic Types

Integer, `i32` and `i64`. Integers are *not* inherently signed or unsigned. They
may be interpreted as signed or unsigned by individual operations.

Boolean, represented as values of `i32`. In a boolean context, any non-zero value
is interpreted as true and `0` is interpreted as false. The behavior is similar
to C.

Floating-point, `f32` and `f64`. Unlike with Numbers in ECMAScript, `NaN` values
in WebAssembly have sign bits and significand fields.

### Tables

A table is similar to a linear-memory, but its value is opaque. Currently the
only valid table element type is `anyfunc`.In the future, tables are expected to
be generalized to hold a wide variety of opaque values and serve a wide variety
of purposes.

### Nondeterminism

It's not 'undefined behavior'. There is no requirement that a given
implementation make the same choice every time, even for successive executions
of the same instruction within the same instance of a module.

## Module

### Module Types

Index, Array, String.

### Instantiation-Time Initializers

`const` and `get_global`

### Module Contents

A version and a sequence of sections. Each section has a name and
associated data.

There are several known sections: type, import, function, table, linear-memory,
export, start, code, data, global, element, name.

### Module Index Space

Module Index Spaces are abstract mappings from indices, starting from zero, to
various types of elements.

Function index space, global index space, linear-memory index space, table index
space.

## Binary format

## Text format

## Validation

## Instruction set
